This video has been dubbed and subtitled into several languages.
On most devices you can call up YouTube settings and switch between them.
And if you do, you'll find that outside the original language, English,
the words in the subtitles and dubbing often don't match,
which happens a lot, mostly in professional TV shows, and it can be frustrating for those of us
who like to listen, but also use subtitles. The short reason why is subtitles and dubbing are
usually done by different teams of people. But to answer why that happens, I need to take you on a
journey that's going to involve Geese, a rollercoaster, and this advert.
This video is sponsored by NordVPN. That's not a joke. This video is actually sponsored by NordVPN,
who have been very useful, as I've been travelling around. Visit nordvpn.com slash Tom Scots to find
the best deal they're offering right now. Now in most of the languages that that advert was translated
into, the subtitles and dubbing pretty much match. In French, Spanish and Portuguese,
the word order is roughly the same as in English, and it's a simple translation. But in the most
obvious Hindi translation, the company name sits in the middle of the sentence, and standard practice
for modern professional dubbing is to match lip movements as closely as possible. Now, there is a way
to rephrase the sentence in Hindi so that the company name sits at the end. The dubbing team
chose that option and the lip movements pretty much match. But the subtitling team didn't see any
reason to do that, and so the lines are different. In Japanese, which has the same problem,
the dubbing team instead found a translation where the lip movements look close enough.
But why don't they just take the dubbing script and then turn it into subtitles? Why translate
everything twice? Well, subtitles have their own limitations. I gave the translation teams for
this video some deliberately difficult examples. A few years ago, I made a video on YouTube's
copyright systems, and it's included this sidebar about a song that I don't like.
Maroon 5's memories is an infuriating composition that uses the start of the melody of Canon
in D, but never resolves it, which means that it has the same stuck-in-your-head effect as the
jingle from Alphabetsto's The demolished man, and I hate it. The modern approach to subtitling,
in most languages, is that reading is faster than talking, and that even for fast talking,
like that, you put every word on screen. The viewer can always pause, but that wasn't always the case.
If you watch anything in English that was subtitled more than 10 or 15 years ago, like
reruns on television or movies on DVD, you'll find the subtitles often summarise what said.
Style guides used to emphasise the skill in careful and sensitive subtitle editing,
because they thought it was important that everyone got the meaning, even if they were a slow reader,
because you couldn't easily pause and go back. And besides, why would someone who can hear,
watch video with subtitles? It's not like we all end up with tiny televisions in our pocket,
or sound mixing changes would mean that dialogue was going to be suddenly difficult to hear.
In the original English version of that maroon 5 rant that I just did,
I made a reference to the demolished man by Alfred Bester, which isn't that well known,
even in English, so for Japanese viewers who have probably never heard of it,
the local subtitle translator decided to remove the reference entirely and get the same meaning
across in fewer characters. Opinions can differ, but I think that's a pretty solid decision.
If they'd just taken the breathless high speed performance of the Japanese voice actor,
then it would have been a worse experience for subtitle readers. And well done to the voice actor,
by the way, that cannot have been easy. And this is just to translate one person performing a script.
Imagine if it was a reality show with six people shouting and talking quickly and stumbling the
words and interrupting each other, the subtitles would have to summarise, while the voice actors for
the dub can shout over each other. But it does mean that in this case for some Japanese viewers,
that reference is lost. That's one of the other big challenges with translation. How much do
you translate the words versus translating the meaning? Here's another really difficult example.
Anyone want to buy some gozzlings? They're going cheap. The English version of that joke is
pretty much impossible to translate. It relies not just on a pun, but on knowledge of colloquial
English. You have to know that going can mean making a noise. You have to know that cheap
is the English word for the noise that baby birds make, cheap cheap cheap. And you have to know that
going cheap spell differently is slang for unsail at a good price. I loved seeing the responses
from the translations on this example. A couple of folks translated it word for word and just
gave up on the joke. Fair enough. But I do want to highlight a couple of them. The Portuguese
subtitle and dubbing teams came up with the same joke and so did the Spanish subtitle. Ganso,
in both languages, means goose and cansado means tired. So they combined them into the word Gansado.
And now I'm asking if anyone wants the gozzlings because I'm goose slash tired of them? Brilliant.
And both the French and Spanish dubbing teams came up with their own puns based on their
languages words for bird noises because yes, the sounds that animals are said to make
differ in each language. And I love this. This is translating meaning and intent not just words.
In case you're wondering, I did try several AI translation tools as well as just asking large
language model to translate this stuff. And as of right now, as of 2023, capturing that nuance,
that meaning, that performance definitely still requires humans. At least for the goose clip,
the translators didn't have to match my lips, but they did have to match the goose's
honk because I talked over it. So they had to go to another bit of the video that you didn't see,
copy and paste the background noise and a different goose honk from there and synchronise them up.
Someone had to lip sync a goose. Beaksync, actually. They don't have lips. I don't think they have lips.
All of which comes together for this example. Last year, I made a video where I tried to get over
my phobia of roller coasters and spoiler, I did. And just after my terror changed to joy on a ride
called Nemesis, I shouted this. The original English is have it. How north do you translate have it?
It's got no literal meaning and more than that, it's kind of obscure, slang, different people in
different parts of Britain might use it for different things and it's almost impossible to google.
In my context, it's a cry of excitement, triumph, adrenaline, encouragement, success. It's the
sort of thing that you might yell after your team scores are goal or to cheer on your friend after
they've successfully downed two points of the lager back to back. It feels very male, very drunken,
lads night out. I did pass a note with all that context onto the translators, but for many
productions, they won't be working with notes. They'll only have the original show and maybe
the script if there is one. So here is that cry in all the videos languages.
Subtitling teams have the choice of any word or phrase, but they have to fit the words on the screen.
Dubbing teams can get the voice actors to emote in the studio as much as possible,
but the lip movements have it to match. That's why subtitles and dubbing differ. And if you want a
perfect example of that, this advert has also been translated into five languages and no matter which
one you speak, you can push NordVPN's magic quick connect button and your phone and compute to
can pretend that there are anyone of around 60 countries from Albania to Vietnam. So if you're
traveling and want websites to stop automatically translating for you, it's easy. Or if you want to
watch stuff from another country, but it's blocked where you are, you can. Just check the streaming
services terms and conditions first. NordVPN works on Windows, Linux, Mac, iOS and Android,
up to six devices at the same time, and there's a 30-day money back guarantee. So if you're not sure,
try it anyway. When I first use it, I thought I'd only use it occasionally, but over the last year,
it really has come in handy for me time after time after time. I keep endorsing NordVPN because
it keeps being a thing I actually use. You can go to nordvpn.com slash Tom Scott or scan the QR code
for the best dealer offering right now, even if you're watching this in the future. I think that
what? Lovely.